---
date: "2024-06-25"
title: How I Learned to Code
---

# How I learned to code

---

## tl;dr

Ass power,
[dozens of projects](https://github.com/orgs/CharmedSatyr-freeCodeCamp/repositories?type=all),
and the [freeCodeCamp](https://www.freeCodeCamp.org) community. I later
completed the final course of [Code Fellows](https://www.codefellows.org/)'s
JavaScript bootcamp.

---

## Lifestyle Design on a Budget

I adored reading English and Philosophy as an undergraduate in New York, and I
treasured my time in London pursuing graduate studies in Philosophy and Public
Policy. My education fundamentally changed the way I think about the world and
gave me tools I aspire to use every day. Aided by my schooling, my early career
involved several slightly prestigious roles: on Obama's first presidential
campaign, on Capitol Hill, and fundraising with some very big names in American
politics and culture.

Somehow, however, I had neglected to translate my experience into fame and
fortune. Fortune was the important one. This became apparent when I decided I
needed, and then was rejected for, a $1,000 bank loan to cover living expenses
while living in Washington, D.C. I had a penchant for nice shoes, take-out, and
frequent international travel, and my student loans were eating me alive.

I began an intensive bout of lifestyle design in a notebook on the plane to
Changwon, South Korea in July 2014. My first career after college had started in
2007 when I simply showed up in an Obama campaign office in Derry, New
Hampshire, volunteered to help, and eventually got hired on. Dysfunction in
Washington had spoiled my enthusiasm for that path. I had selected my second
career—beginning with the English as a Foreign Language teaching position the
jet was taking me to—as a means of getting paid to travel and live abroad. I was
inspired in this by _Moby Dick_'s Ishmael, who took up whaling with similar
motivations.

My third career needed to give me more financial security. It needed to
accomodate my wanderlust, if possible, and it definitely could not have a high
financial barrier to entry. Law school was desireable but didn't fit the bill.
Writing or teaching was unlikely to placate Sallie Mae any time soon. My
longsuffering [YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/user/wenwrendogaming)
wasn't taking off. It felt like kicking the can down the road to start applying
to culinary school or Ph.D. programs. I looked into e-commerce, drop shipping,
and affiliate marketing schemes, but for various reasons they didn't click.

I'm extremely detail-oriented and enjoy tinkering. In previous jobs, I'd nerded
out on Excel formulas, precise word choices, and automating processes. As a
gamer, I seemed to spend at least as much time modifying game assets as playing.
Software development seemed to offer everything I was looking for: good
compensation, skill-based rather than formal qualifications, and the possibility
of working remotely.

I resolved on that flight to learn to code.

## Finding My Community

Where to start? I followed promising accounts on Twitter, searched for
tutorials, and read up online after long days in the classroom. I didn't fully
understand the differences among scripting languages, development tools, or
other resources I needed to embark on a career.

Online privacy and security had become hot topics following
[global surveillance disclosures](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2010s_global_surveillance_disclosures),
and I began to improve my security posture. I installed
[Tor](https://www.torproject.org/), switched to GNU/Linux and open source tools,
encrypted my hard drive, and became more deliberate on social media. The infosec
community on Twitter was engaging and doing important work, but I still needed a
path to employment.

[Game development](/games) was a strong interest, but I lacked a clear entry
point for that as well. Fellow YouTubers and modders that I interacted with did
not have salaried roles in games.

I had started my second teaching position and moved to beautiful Busan, South
Korea when I found an online invitation mentioning a few people, mostly ex-pats,
would be meeting up on alternate Sundays at a local civic building to work
through a web development website's free curriculum.

The group's leader—a fellow EFL teacher—was engaging, motivated, and made me
feel welcome.
([He's written about this period](https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/south-korea-will-pay-you-to-learn-coding-5947fa625659/)
and has since gone on to be a successful software developer.)

After a few meetups, I knew I'd found my place. I started completing coding
exercises not only at meetings but between. I appreciated being able to make fun
static pages with HTML, CSS, and tools like Bootstrap, but I fell in love once I
graduated to JavaScript. Scripting was powerful. It was versatile. It was
intellectually interesting. All the little bits of syntax I was learning offered
me not only new ways to solve problems but opened up the possibilities of the
digital age. The web page became my canvas.

<figure>
	![My freeCodeCamp cohort in Busan](/static/images/freeCodeCamp.png)
	<figcaption>
		My freeCodeCamp cohort in Busan. Members of the group still keep in touch
		from time to time.
	</figcaption>
</figure>

Even if web development wasn't what I'd expected when I set out to learn to
code, it would give me a technical foundation on which to build.

## The Grind

Joining a club wasn't by itself enough to train my new skills to a professional
level. When people ask me if I learned Korean while teaching abroad, I sometimes
joke, "Nope, I learned JavaScript instead."

> Everybody wants to go to heaven and nobody wants to die. It's ass power, man.
> You have to be emotionally ready to put as much energy into it as it takes to
> make it right.

I took producer Quincy Jones's
[reflection on Michael Jackson's success](https://www.worldradiohistory.com/Archive-All-Music/Musician/1980/1981/Musician-1981-09.pdf)
as my rallying cry. I developed **ass power**, the determination to sit in my
chair and work, putting sometimes 60 hours into training and coding projects a
week between 2016 and 2018. Although I enjoyed much of what Busan had to offer,
most days I woke up early and spent all day on code challenges or my latest web
application before walking along the beach to teach evening English classes.
Increasingly brutal student loan payments sometimes motivated me to code after
class, too.

With each project, I aimed to not only complete the acceptance criteria provided
by freeCodeCamp or other resources I found but to learn one additional thing.
Why not style with [SASS](https://sass-lang.com/) this time? Lemme try to
optimize this build process with [Gulp](https://gulpjs.com/)! Why don't I set up
a Linux box and host this website myself? How can I make the data I'm storing
more secure? What's new with [React](https://react.dev/)?

At freeCodeCamp meetups, I'd share my work with other members and check in on
their progress. As time went on, I was able to help fellow students with their
projects.

I found broader communities as well. I completed three rounds of
[#100DaysOfCode](https://x.com/hashtag/100daysofcode) on Twitter, demonstrating
my (overly) consistent development practice and cheering others along with
theirs. I contributed code to a few open source projects. I started supporting
organizations like the [EFF](https://www.eff.org) and
[Free Software Foundation](https://fsf.org). Some friends and I submitted the
winning project—a crowd-sourced, alternative point-of-interest geo-mapping
application for smartphones—for the hackathon at Startup Weekend Busan.

I continued writing code for full-stack freeCodeCamp projects until I got my
first development job in 2019. I earned
[multiple certificates](https://www.freecodecamp.org/charmedsatyr), and the code
for many of the projects I built has
[made its way into its own GitHub organization](https://github.com/CharmedSatyr-freeCodeCamp)
for safekeeping. I don't look at my old projects much, but I'm proud of what I
was able to build with my friends.

## A Leap of Faith (in Myself)

Although I've never quite gotten over my imposter syndrome as someone who
transitioned to a technical industry mid-career, in 2018 I took the plunge, quit
my teaching job, and started looking full-time for a software role. I had had
some success picking up freelancing projects for small businesses and academic
clients, but I needed a full-time gig.

After re-acquainting myself with family in Mississippi after years overseas, and
a discouraging number of unanswered job applications, I decided that I should
move somewhere well-known for its software industry if I wanted to give myself
the best possible prospects.

I also began looking at code bootcamps. I was confident that I had learned what
I could on my own, but I didn't know what I didn't know. Why weren't employers
clamoring for me? Where there gaps in my training plan? I'd spent time with
resources besides freeCodeCamp, and it seemed like there was no end to what I
_could_ learn. Did I need to earn a particular certification? Were my resume or
portfolio website not showcasing my abilities well? Was I too old to change
careers, as members of my family helpfully suggested, and destined to spend my
days at the front of a classroom?

I'd never been to Seattle, but it seemed like a good place for developers—home
to several prominent companies, near the ocean and mountains, and with a cheaper
cost of living than Silicon Valley. When I applied to
[Code Fellows](https://www.codefellows.org/), a bootcamp in the shadow of the
Space Needle, the admissions team allowed me to undertake a skills assessment. I
tested directly into the school's most advanced course for my stack,
[Code 401: Advanced Software Development in Full-Stack JavaScript](https://www.codefellows.org/courses/code-401/advanced-software-development-in-full-stack-javascript/).
Instead of a series of courses spanning a year or more, I could get a
certificate, career advice, and networking opportunities by capping off my
education with a single class.

Reminiscent of my long voyage from Mississippi to Derry, New Hampshire in 2007
or to South Korea in 2014, I drove to Seattle sight-unseen with the intention of
starting a new life and set up shop in a dismal shoebox in the International
District. The bootcamp turned out to intense and introduced me to developers and
developer communities in my new city. I determined that my software skills were
solid, but I did pick up some things I hadn't learned on my own:
[Swagger](https://swagger.io/) docs, Agile methodologies, and other tools that
shone for teams rather than solo developers.

When I got my first software developer job in August 2019, I was able to be
immediately productive. My ass power enabled me to rise from Associate Software
Developer to Senior Software Developer and Engineering Manager within four short
years.

**I paid off my student loans.**

I'm incredibly grateful for the opportunities and communities I've gained by
learning to code. I'm just getting started in this industry.
